+++
title = 'CCC Summary'
date = 2015-01-01T22:00:00
tags = ['ccc', 'hacking']
+++


To be honest, this CCC was mental healing for me. I went on a trip with a lot
on my mind and I just couldn't relax. I didn't relax until the last day of the
congress. Why? For 8.5 years of my professional carrier as a system
administrator, I've never heard "good job, man" in as many words as "what did
you fuck up?" kind of critics, so it finally got to me. On the other hand, CCC
is all about sharing knowledge and telling interesting stories to other people.
It relaxed me because I realized that, although I'm totally weird for people in
my country, I'm nothing strange on the conference. I was accepted. FINALLY!!!

Let's start from the beginning. My fiancé was so excited about CCC. I still
can't understand her, as she's something like a child psychologist. There are
topics covering e-learning and stuff like that, but she understands hacking,
programming, administration, security, privacy, etc. So, for the first time in
my life I'm with the girl I don't have to explain what my job and hobbies are
all about. What a relief! Second, she booked us tickets for hacker tour of
[DESY](http://desy.de), particle accelerator. What? My girlfriend not only
understands me, she's pushing me in the right direction? I must be dreaming.
Let me repeat. My fiancé was excited about seeing particle accelerator more
then buying new camera (she's also amateur photographer). How cool is that?

OK, we're at the airport. As I've never flew in an airplane before, I had no
idea what to expect. It was fun, of course. Seeing the clouds from above,
seeing the Sun, as it's winter and it's cloudy every day. The G force when
taking off was something I should have anticipated, but I was so surprised. And
most of all, the size of Munich and Hamburg airports was astonishing. Let me
explain. I was born and I still live in a town of 300k people. We don't even
have an airport, so seeing something that huge was great. Oh, and seeing that
even Germans get some things too late was so precious to me.

We're in Hamburg. As my fiancé and I can't speak German, it's fun. It's so well
organized that we can not comprehend it. It took me 4 days to figure out how to
properly read S bahn maps. Germans are looking at us like Martians when we ask
something like "in which direction is Dammtor station?", because it's so
obvious to them. Let me tell you, I don't mind. I come from a different
culture, if you can call it a culture at all, and having diversity in almost
everything is something I find useful. Of course, you feel like a jerk at
first, but it's an adventure.

We're at the Congress Centrum Hamburg, finally. It's so huge I didn't get to
know my way around it in 4 days. I still couldn't find my way around, and we
heard from an older W Holand member that they maybe return CCC to Berlin, but
to a proper congress center big enough for 50k people. I was like "What? That's
1/6 of the population of my town! Do you rent a bike to go around it?". Anyway,
they have few solutions in mind when CCH becomes too crowded (it's already a
bit crowded). You can download all lectures from [CCC
FTP](https://ftp.ccc.de/congress/31C3/). To be honest, I can point at only
one lecturer, a friend of ours from Varaždin, Croatia:
[UNHash - Methods for better password
cracking](https://ftp.ccc.de/congress/31C3/h264-hd/31c3-5966-en-de-UNHash_-_Methods_for_better_password_cracking_hd.mp4).

After congress, we had new year eve celebration at our friends house from
Hamburg who speaks really good Serbian, so we finally could forget English. He
was super nice and prepared beer and dinner I will never forget. Even if it was
the worst night ever I would still have to say it was the best ever, because of
his kick boxing black belt. No kidding with this guy. :o)

For the end, I have few things anyone traveling to Germany and not knowing
German language should know. First, Turkish food is THE BEST! Sorry folks from
other countries, but Turks prepare insanely large and delicious dishes. You
can't compete with that. Second is, if you want to ask a random dude on the
street for directions or help in English, ask the black guy, as Germans and
English are not really tight. It's not about racism, it's just that there's a
huge chance that black guy is actually from USA and can understand you. Of
course, we decided to take German classes once we get home. Ideally, knowing
English, German, Spanish and Chinese, you're prepared for the world. We'll see
how good we'll become at learning new languages, but hey, I learn new
programming languages once a year. What's a new spoken language compared to
that. :o) We're preparing for the flight home, as tomorrow morning we're
departing. It was nice, useful, helpful and fun. Thank you for all the fish!
