+++
title = 'Freelancing and USA company'
date = 2014-11-27T22:00:00
tags = ['work']
+++

Sorry, folks, but I've got nothing nice for this post. Last night I got an
email that made me laugh and angry, at the same time. I tried to negotiate some
freelance job, and after a week of talk I get "send me a Word copy of your
resume and a copy of your drivers license or passport". Right. Word? For Linux
administrator? First big fail by the company. OK, I copy/paste my
[resume](/resume) into LibreOffice, do some minor editing and send it with "My
Word copy of a resume is attached ... I can't send one (copy of a passport,
that is) to random people on the Internet just because they ask me to. Sorry".
Am I being I jerk? I don't think so. Think about it. You can reset almost
anything with a copy of a passport and email address. Almost anything, for
example, was my password for a credit card site. I might be crazy, but I'm not
dumb. What's their excuse? "We're going to give you root login, and we're
serious US company" (in much more words, so I'm paraphrasing). So that should
give you credibility to ask people for passport? Right! Naturally, they
canceled the job. To be honest, they just got to a job post first, otherwise I
would do it.

Let's go back a little. Let's say I want to hire you and I say "I'm a
representative of a US company". Would you give me your passport? How do you
know I do have a company? Internet site? Or I'm really registered. It's easy to
do that even in my shit hole of a country where you usually need tons of
papers, but not for a company, they want to get your tax money as soon as
possible. Just think what all you can do with someone's ID or passport. Now add
to that the fact that I'm a hacker, meaning I spend my time thinking about
intrusion, malware, viruses, social engineering and who knows what else. Why?
Because I'm usually hired to think about that and come up with a protection. In
a word, I'm dealing with all kinds of lies and deceiving people, but all of a
sudden, if you happen to have a USA company, I should trust you? I mean, why
even emphasize your in the USA? World terrorist number one country in the world
should give me some fuzzy feeling and I fall into hypnotic state and trust you
completely? Get the fuck out!

And let me tell you, I did think this through. I didn't want to say who they
are, but fuck you retards from [Epic Farts](http =//epicforce.net/). If you mark
me as "not smart enough" when declining my application, I can be jerk, too, you
dumb ass.
