+++
title = 'Presonus Audiobox 1818VLS 2'
date = 2014-12-15T22:00:00
tags = ['music', 'daw']
+++


And it finally arrived. First, right channel on the headphones didn't work. I
made a peace with myself that I have to spend some more money for sending it to
Thomman to replace it with a working one. I tried everything that came to my
head and couldn't figure out what's wrong. As my friend brought it for me, we
were not at my home, so on the way home I figured out that I didn't check the
pan. While unpacking it, there was a trillion of "please be the pan" prayers.
I've connected it, fired it up, and everything was just working. I still have
no idea how or why. And now for the technical details.

The reason I wanted this card is because it's the only USB 2.0 audio interface
that is seamlessly supported under GNU/Linux that I know of. You just plug it
in, start JACK, and you have 18 inputs and 18 outputs. Just so you know, 1+2
outputs are the main, 7+8 are headphones and 9+10 are S/PDIF. As for inputs,
9+10 are S/PDIF and the rest is as it's numerated. My setup is that in first
input I have my guitar (1st and 2nd are mic/instrument combo, others are
mic/line). The guitar is always routed to S/PDIF output, and that output goes
to my guitar processor's (Line 6 POD X3 Pro) input. S/PDIF output of POD is
returned into S/PDIF input on the card. This setup enables me to record dry and
wet guitar at the same time, as POD always gets it's input from Presonus, I
never have to change inputs or outputs with it, and I can reamp dry tracks. One
of the problems I had with a previous setup was that audio card didn't have
guitar input, so I had to use POD for everything. This means, that while
recording dry guitar, I would listen to analog output of POD with full
simulation of amp for monitoring, and send dry signal through S/PDIF. Once I
record it, I had to switch input to S/PDIF, which is the last item on the menu
where you choose your input. Guess what's the first option: guitar input, of
course. So I spent a lot of time going back and forth through the menu which
doesn't go to first item once you've passed the last one. What a hassle! And
that's not enough. Because previous card, M-Audio Delta 1010LT can not be
worldclock master, I had to switch the master every time I wanted to switch to
"studio mode" or back to normal mode. Switching to studio means POD is the
master, I switch to S/PDIF sync on Delta and everything works. The trouble is
going back, because you can't just switch the sync source. You have to stop
JACK, switch the sync source, start JACK and start all programs that don't
handle JACK stopping well. If I just power off POD while it's sync master,
Delta just dies. One reboot later you're good to go. That was a pain! Now I can
even bring my studio anywhere and record. That means that I can finally have
the same setup and latency no matter where I record (we used my guitar player's
laptop and audio interface for vocals).

Now for some fine tuning. First, every USB interface should have 3 as number of
periods, compared to all other interfaces which have 2. You really want
linux-image-lowlatency. My stable setup with a xrun now and then dropped from
10.5ms to 2.7ms. On 10.5ms you can notice the latency if you play something
fast, and we do. Of course, I use maximum sampling frequency of 96k. I
recommend using KXStudio repository, Cadence for JACK management, Ardour3 for
recording and SoundCloud for sharing tunes. Hear ya soon!
